Bad Customer Service And Fighting For A Reasonable Outcome
2014-04-21

I wanted to make a point about how to deal with customer service when you have been wronged by someone you buy goods/services from, but I would like to start out with a story.

Two years ago, when I was about 2 months into a 24 month contract with Virgin Mobile, I had my phone service abruptly cut off without warning. I was not behind on payments so was pretty confused about why that would happen. When I called up customer service they seemed to suggest there were some issues with my account and they required that I provide them with 100 points of identification and a bank statement in the form of a fax. Within minutes I provided them with all this information and I insisted they stay on the line while I did it. They told me that as soon as they had all of that information they would be able to reinstate my service immediately. After they had received it all they told me to wait and I would would receive a call back from them within 30 minutes. I did not. So I called them after 30 minutes.

After waiting on hold and explaining my situation a second time I was told simply “The finance department is not available to verify the documents”. This time I was really confused since they said I would get my service reinstated immediately so I tried to press them on what exactly the problem was and when it would get resolved. The customer service agent seemed to have no information at all. I suspect they were about as confused as I were and were only really able to tell me to wait for the finance department to review my documents.

I was extremely frustrated by this point as I had no phone service and calling my phone number essentially informed callers “This service has been deactivated”. I had no way to receive calls, my voicemail was not reachable, and text messages were going nowhere. Finally I had a new mobile phone that was locked to Virgin so couldn’t buy a sim card from someone else and use that.

I was told about the Telecommunications Industry Ombudsman (http://www.tio.com.au/) and that their specific responsibility was to resolve issues between consumers and telecommunications companies. So I went to their website and filled out a complaint, which was fairly straight forward and I received an email from them the next day saying that they had sent a letter to Virgin telling them they had 2 weeks to resolve the complaint with me directly. At this point I had told the TIO that the resolution I wanted was to have my service reinstated and be refunded for the cost of buying a prepaid sim card for temporary use.

I was a little annoyed about having to wait 2 weeks so I kept calling Virgin Mobile customer service every day, but every single time they told me exactly the same thing which may as well have been nothing and was essentially to wait for the finance department. Though I think one of the times they actually asked me to send them all of identification documents again.

I decided to call the TIO and get more information from them about what I could do. They were incredibly helpful and made it apparent that their job was to help me resolve my issue. I described what happened and the representative told me that it is actually going against industry standards to cut somebody’s service off without informing them. They are meant to tell me that they cut it off and why. I then asked him about what a fair outcome was and he basically said that I should be able to get refunded for the cost of the temporary sim card. At this point I was so frustrated with Virgin that I told him that I wanted to get out of my contract early and not have to deal with them anymore. He said that Virgin aren’t really required to do that, but I can certainly ask for that outcome.

Eventually (after around 7 days) I was contacted by somebody from the financial department at Virgin and basically they claimed that my account was being investigated for fraud, because of some mistake when I filled in my contract. The person I spoke to was incredibly rude and defensive (clearly not trained in customer service). I was offered no compensation at this point and when asking how it is fair to be treated this way, I received the complete non sequitur “we are required to take fraud very seriously”. If I recall she claimed that I had put somebody else’s driver’s licence number on my contract, but since I had a copy myself I was able to later confirm that this was not true at all.

I decided that I was unsatisfied with everything that had happened and this clearly was not a reasonable outcome so I continued to call customer service each time informing them that I was not adequately compensated for all of the mistreatment. Eventually (and I think it was around the 2 week mark set by the TIO) I was contacted by the head of the customer relations department, who, for the first time I suspect, was not in an offshore call center, and he was genuinely empathetic. He stated in no uncertain terms that this is absolutely no way to treat customers and apologised on behalf of Virgin.

At this point I realised I had reached a person who was actually empowered to solve the problem. So I stated to him that I would not be satisfied unless they terminated my contract early and allowed me to walk away from them entirely. He agreed that this was fair given the circumstances and terminated my contract 22 months early and said I had 2 months to send back the phone that was part of my contract.

I was finally happy. I had got what I wanted and clearly this cost Virgin money to have to now take back an $800 phone that after my first month free had only been paid off something like $50.

I thought this was an interesting story, because I don’t know if I have heard of anybody getting out of a contract early with a service provider in Australia and even the TIO didn’t think that it was likely to happen.

Now back to the point I was trying to make…

I suspect most people have at one time or another had a problem with their phone or internet providers. A lot of the time, however, people don’t do anything about it. When we are treated badly by goods/service providers it is our responsibility to do something about it, because when we do it usually improves things for ourselves and always improves things for future consumers. What can/should we do if our service provider screws us:

## Figure Out How They Could Fix It
Firstly you need to look at the situation rationally and determine exactly what outcome you want. You should think about what they did wrong, what they should have done and finally how they can make it right. You need to be really certain about what would make you happy. And yes, you should not just be okay with the result, you should be happy with it. This is critical because the trade of money for goods/services should benefit both parties and this means that you should actually end up with a net positive gain in value.

It is important when thinking about these issues to not be simply upset about things, but be rational enough that you know how they could fix it. If you are emotional and unfocused then nobody is going to be able to give you what you want, except maybe a hug, but most companies won’t do that either.

The key to deciding what you want and then getting it is having a reasonable expectation in mind. Make sure you have really thought about the problem, you know who is at fault, you know the specific mistreatment you have experienced, you know who is responsible for fixing this (and the extent of their responsibility) and finally you know how you would like them to fix it. I often get what I want in the end and that is because what I want is reasonable.

## Speak To Customer Service
It is important that when you speak to customer service you are very direct in explaining what has happened and how they can fix it. At this point you should know what you want and are able to make that known to the company you are dealing with. Many times people just call up customer service and are emotional and indirect. They don’t know what they want but just want somebody to yell at. Don’t be that person.

Customer service reps are specifically trained to deal with 2 types of people (well there are more than 2 but for the sake of simplicity bare with me). Emotional people and rational people. They can detect from the way you talk that you are emotional and know that the only way to help you is by saying things like “I understand that this must be very frustrating for you”. To the rational person these words are meaningless and they know that too. So if sympathy is all you want then go tell your friends and family about it. But if you want an actual favorable outcome then you need to be direct, rational and reasonable.

## Social Networks
A really simple way to drive your complaint forward, and great way to vent frustration, is to complain on social networks. Almost every company is on facebook and twitter. Go ahead and post on their facebook wall, tweet @ them, and follow up when they reply with empty gestures of “I’m sorry to hear that. Please contact customer service so that we can help make it right.” The correct response to such nonsense is “Did you read what I wrote? I have already contacted customer service and have not been satisfied.”

## Change Providers
This is usually a no-brainer, but people sometimes can’t be bothered. Like I said at the start it is not only about you. Future customers will receive better treatment if you walk as a result of this issue. As soon as you can, which is usually after your complaint is satisfactorily resolved, you should change to a different goods/service provider immediately. And hopefully you get the chance to inform the company that this event is why you are leaving. With enough people leaving the customer service should improve over time.

## Follow Through
Lastly people sometimes just give up, because it is too difficult to keep fighting. Well that may make sense if you are too busy, but most of the time you are going to end up being less happy if you don’t follow through. This means continue to call customer service, continue to state explicitly what you want, continue to post on their Facebook wall and finally take your business elsewhere. In the end you will feel much better about things.
