My First Ever Challenge
2013-09-25

I wanted to write a post about my first challenge but I want to preface this by pointing out why I really think this is the first challenge I have ever faced. Before continuing to describe why I don't think I've faced any challenges before I should probably also state that this challenge is probably very minor compared to others challenges and the purpose of writing this blog post is purely to alleviate my anxiety as I find myself under-prepared to handle personal difficulties.

I am often remarking to the people around me about how easy my life has been. I really mean easy not in the sense of flattering myself and not with the purpose of bragging, but rather in the glass half full sense. And to continue that metaphor I truly believe I was only ever presented with a glass that was completely full. I never went without, I never experienced any serious suffering and I always had family and friends around me when I needed them.

I was brought up by parents that cared about me as a child, they loved me and raised me in a way that I really can't fault and I feel incredibly fortunate to have had them as parents. My parents weren't exactly rich, but they were wealthy enough to give me everything I needed to be a happy child. I never really went without anything as a child and again its hard to overstate how easy and great my childhood was. As a child I was also fortunate enough to have a brief couple of years experience in the exciting world of child acting. I had a huge amount of fun appearing in commercials and TV shows, but I was also able to happily walk away from this career path as I discovered it wasn't really my passion.

Throughout high school, while I went through a short lived period of rebellion against nothing in particular I still made it through without any serious difficulties. I didn't always have a large group of friends, but I think that I always had at least one friend and one favourite pastime. For the most part they both revolved around online gaming, but these things were always enough to ensure that I was never depressed.

In my final year of high school I was struck again with some luck that I can't really explain. I all of a sudden gained an incredible urge to study hard and get good grades. This was the only time my school grades mattered and I luckily managed to get the marks I needed to get into a good university. Although I believe I consciously made the choice to study hard I really feel like I can only describe this as luck since I couldn't possibly say what caused me to make that decision.

I studied physics at university which I found interesting, but ultimately not what I wanted to do as a career. Through some good fortune I elected to take some subjects in Computer Science. I found this to be my real passion and got a really good education in the few electives I took. While completing an honours thesis in Physics I got a really good internship working for a mining company. I was somehow able to shift my focus in both my thesis and my internship towards writing software. I gained a great deal of knowledge and straight out of school got a job as a software engineer.

It is an incredible thing to be in a job where you are doing work that you would actually enjoy doing in your spare time. That's what software development is. I really believe I am living the dream. Through possibly the most luck out of all these events, just 6 months out of University I got offered a job at Groupon, and was relocated all expenses paid to Chicago.

Jumping to a more personal level it would be hard to state my good fortune without mentioning the incredible people I have in my life. Firstly my brother, Oliver, who has been possibly the biggest influence on my creative and intellectual development. Without having an older brother with the kind of intelligence that he has I could say fairly confidently I would not be the person I am today. I also was lucky enough to meet a woman who is capable of making me incredibly happy. I don't believe in the idea of a soulmate, but I do believe that if you are lucky enough to find a woman that is intelligent, beautiful, intellectually challenging, thoughtful, willing to put up with your flaws and most importantly loves you as much you love them, then that is about as close to a soulmate as you can get. I love Jess so much and rarely go a day without getting shivers of excitement about spending the rest of my life with her. The rest of my family and friends have also been incredible and I am glad that I have somehow managed to persistently be surrounded by good people.

That takes me to where I am now. I have had literally nothing to complain about ever. I probably still don't really have anything to complain about but here is what I have gone through the last couple of weeks.

It first started when I was at a software development conference in St. Louis with a bunch of guys from work. I at some point, while listening to a talk, blacked out and woke up a couple of minutes later surrounded by some familiar faces and several unfamiliar faces. All signs indicated that I had a seizure and I was taken to the hospital. Two people from work who I only really knew inside work accompanied me to the hospital and waited around with me for 6 hours to get a CT scan. The scan discovered a slight discolouration which I was told could potentially be what caused my seizure and it may possibly be a brain tumor. A follow up MRI showed that it was NOT A BRAIN TUMOR, but just a collection of malformed blood vessels in my brain known as a Cavernoma. I am still waiting to hear from specialists about the next steps with regard to possible surgery or simply leaving it where it is, but I wanted to write this post now to reduce my anxiety.

I have never really had any scary medical issues before so I have been having a tough time processing all this information, but it has reminded me of how good people generally are. Being in a new country without really having any good friends I have had to rely on the support of people I have only known for a short period of time, but they have still been amazing. I have had several people ask me how I was doing and they seem to actually care about me, which is very nice considering they haven't know me for very long.

So after all that I suppose the biggest challenge I've faced through this was somehow accepting the idea that I will occasionally have medical issues and will need to actually ask for help and talk about my problems. I learned that people are willing to help and that I can talk openly about my fears, which is a valuable lesson in my opinion.

just wanted to share my thoughts....
