A Response To: Social Networks Make Us Antisocial
Sunday, May 4, 2014

This is something I have heard mostly from the older generations who tend to not actually really be using social networks, but lately I have seen quite a lot of younger people buying into this argument. An example of what I mean by this can be found in this ["Look Up" video](http://goo.gl/uUkx7t) . Here the creator of the video claims that we waste so much time on social networks and barely communicate with people any more. He makes some comment about how much happier he was as a kid when he used to play in the park and on the swings and run in dirt. This is contrasted to the present day where kids apparently always sit around quite depressed staring at an iPad or playing video games with isolating headphones on.

Firstly I want to call the creator of this video out on the fact that all of the footage is acted (that’s okay), but in every scene in which people are using technology they all look very sad and lonely. Then in the scenes in which people are playing and talking together they are all laughing and appear very happy. This is complete rubbish. The fact of the matter is people are just as often having fun while using technology, and they are just as often sitting around bored/sad while in a room full of people they don’t really get along with.

The other thing that sucks about the video is all the rhyming. It’s not very clever and is only there to heighten the emotional response of the viewer (along with the music and editing). Being a somewhat cynical person this all stood out to me as I was in no way emotionally engaged (try watching the video while focusing on being rational, it really comes across as whiny and nonsensical). Lastly I don’t want to suggest I was the first person to notice the irony (check the comments), but this video has been spreading quite rapidly across social networks since it was posted.

Okay, now in defense of technology/social networks… It is quite apparent to anybody who steps back for a second to think rationally about this that technology has done nothing if not enabled communication. We live in a time where we are more connected to other people than at any other point in history.

One year ago I moved to the other side of the world for work and have been fortunate enough to still carry on real and meaningful relationships with the people back home that I care about. I do occasionally find myself neglecting social interaction with the physically present in favor of sending a chat to the people that mean a great deal to me. As such I am looking down at my phone in social situations and am thus guilty of what is being discouraged by this video. But the reality is that this is becoming more and more socially acceptable. The people who have a problem with it do so because they don’t understand why I would prefer to chat with my partner on my phone than with some person that just happens to be in the same room as me at the moment. Social progress is being made here, but there are still people that oppose it with nothing but emotional reasoning.

Social networks, specifically, have done a huge amount of good for social interactions. Sure, the number of friends you have on facebook may be inflated compared to the number of meaningful relationships you have, but these social networks are still enabling those relationships.

Social networks have enabled me to organize nearly all of the events/gatherings I have had with my friends over the last few years. I certainly could have written cards to all of them inviting them to my events or sent out text messages to each one of them, but none of these are as simple as creating a facebook event, nor are any of them even comparable to the level of interaction we get with facebook events. I can get immediate feedback from friends about whether they are free, about whether or not there are better times/locations for the event and see who will be attending. Also all my friends can see who will be attending so they are more likely to know whether or not they want to attend. Also they can easily organize group transportation and so on.

Social networks enable my friends and family to keep track of what I am doing while 14 000 km away and they enable me to see everything my friends are doing as well. They allow me to keep friends I have made all across the world and specifically they have allowed me to make new friends across the world.

Since the video also depicts gaming as another thing holding us back from socializing I would like to address that a little, too. When I was younger I was a fairly geeky kid with few friends at school. Not being one of the popular kids meant that socializing with kids at school wasn’t really always an option. I am not the only person to go through that, nor was I subject to the worst of it, but it certainly was not a lot of fun.

When I was around 15 we got a broadband internet connection and I was excited to hook my Xbox up to Xbox Live and play Halo 2 online. The Xbox Live starter kit came with a headset for talking to other players. After just one night I had already made friends. It was incredible. A place you could go where you were guaranteed to meet people with at least one shared interest and immediately offering you the opportunity to develop strong friendship through teamwork. Video games may distract people from "The Real World", but for me, and many others, it meant being able to talk to other like minded people and have fun, something that’s difficult when you are the geeky outcast.

Over the years of playing online games I made several friends that I have met in real life and these are some of my best friends, still, after many years. I have even made friends with people from other countries and met them in real life. The awesome thing about online gaming is that it flips the social hierarchy such that the nerdiest kids are the most popular. I am incredibly thankful for the joy and hope technology gave me as a kid and think that it has profoundly improved my confidence and social skills.

Next time you hear somebody tell you that you are being antisocial by playing with your mobile phone you might be able to defend yourself with some of the arguments I have discussed. Social norms continue to evolve and hopefully people can learn to not make the mistake of always thinking that the way they learned to socialize is the only way to socialize.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/ytc9-wGCHW0" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
